[VEN-1910]: add technical docs for diamond proxy (#69)
VenusProtocol/venus-protocol-documentation: technical-reference/reference-technical-articles/diamond-comptroller.md

> # Diamond Comptroller in the Core pool

Reviewer: ```suggestion
# Core pool Diamond Comptroller
```

Author: Done [aa851b5](https://github.com/VenusProtocol/venus-protocol-documentation/pull/69/commits/aa851b5af5063542068ad5e6bf0ab9fb41087b00)

> The problem at hand arose when additional features were introduced to the Comptroller contract within the core pool, causing it to surpass the [maximum allowable size of 24KB](https://eips.ethereum.org/EIPS/eip-170). In response to this challenge and to preemptively address similar issues in the future, a multifaceted solution was implemented.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As features continued to be introduced to the Core Pool Comptroller contract, it grew to exceed the [maximum allowable size of 24KB](https://eips.ethereum.org/EIPS/eip-170). In response to this challenge and to preemptively address similar issues in the future, a multifaceted diamond pattern was implemented.
```

Author: Done [aa851b5](https://github.com/VenusProtocol/venus-protocol-documentation/pull/69/commits/aa851b5af5063542068ad5e6bf0ab9fb41087b00)

> The solution involves the incorporation of the [EIP-2535](https://eips.ethereum.org/EIPS/eip-2535) pattern into the Comptroller contract of the Core pool, which has been refactored into distinct facets. This restructuring aligns the storage layout with that of the Comptroller proxy, streamlining the contract's organization and enhancing efficiency. Consequently, user interactions now trigger two delegate calls, and addressing the size constraint effectively.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The original comptroller was refactored using the [EIP-2535](https://eips.ethereum.org/EIPS/eip-2535) diamond pattern into distinct facets. This restructuring aligns the storage layout with that of the Comptroller proxy, streamlining the contract's organization and enhancing efficiency. As a consequence  user interactions now trigger two delegate calls.
```

Author: Done [aa851b5](https://github.com/VenusProtocol/venus-protocol-documentation/pull/69/commits/aa851b5af5063542068ad5e6bf0ab9fb41087b00)

## Venus Comptroller - Refactored to EIP 2535

> The previous implementation of Venus used a transparent upgrade proxy pattern with EternalStorage, for the diamond proxy we needed a slightly different implementation of fallback function.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The previous implementation of Venus used a transparent upgrade proxy pattern with ExternalStorage. For the diamond proxy we needed a slightly different implementation of fallback function.
```

Author: Done [aa851b5](https://github.com/VenusProtocol/venus-protocol-documentation/pull/69/commits/aa851b5af5063542068ad5e6bf0ab9fb41087b00)

> The previous implementation of Venus used a transparent upgrade proxy pattern with EternalStorage, for the diamond proxy we needed a slightly different implementation of fallback function.

Author: Done [aa851b5](https://github.com/VenusProtocol/venus-protocol-documentation/pull/69/commits/aa851b5af5063542068ad5e6bf0ab9fb41087b00)

- Comptroller proxy(Unitroller): https://bscscan.com/address/0xfd36e2c2a6789db23113685031d7f16329158384
- Comptroller implementation before enabling the Diamond Proxy:  https://bscscan.com/address/0x909dd16b24cef96c7be13065a9a0eaf8a126ffa5

> The following diagram shows the previous situation:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The following diagram shows the previous design:
```

<figure><img src="../../.gitbook/assets/diamond-previous.png" alt="Diamond - Previous hierarchy of contracts"><figcaption></figcaption></figure>

The Unitroller contract delegated calls to the Comptroller. The Comptroller had the storage layout defined by ComptrollerV12Storage, which extended the UnitrollerAdminStorage.

> The Diamond Proxy pattern is widely used in Solidity development for its ability to separate concerns and improve code maintainability. It is often used in complex contracts that require multiple facets with shared functionality.
> 
> ## EIP - 2535 Overview

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## EIP - 2535 Overview

The Diamond Proxy pattern is widely used in Solidity development for its ability to separate concerns and improve code maintainability. It is often used in complex contracts that require multiple facets with shared functionality.

```

Author: Done [aa851b5](https://github.com/VenusProtocol/venus-protocol-documentation/pull/69/commits/aa851b5af5063542068ad5e6bf0ab9fb41087b00)

1. The Diamond Proxy pattern involves creating a "proxy" contract that acts as a single entry point for all functionality shared by multiple contracts. This allows contracts to share functionality without having to duplicate code in each contract.

2. Each contract that needs to share functionality with the proxy contract is referred to as a "facet." Facets are separate contracts that can be upgraded or modified independently of each other and the proxy contract.

3. The proxy contract delegates function calls to the correct facet contract based on the function selector. This allows the proxy contract to act as a single entry point for all shared functionality.

4. The Diamond Proxy pattern also supports multiple inheritances. This means that each facet can inherit from other contracts, including other facets. This allows for a high degree of code reuse and modular design.

## Enabling Venus Integration with the existing Unitroller - Diamond and Transparent proxy combination

> **Step 1:** The first step involved the creation of a new contract that serves as the Diamond proxy. This contract contains a mapping to hold the addresses of the facet contracts and a fallback function that delegates the function call to the appropriate facet. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Step 1:** The first step was creating the Diamond proxy contract. This contract contains a mapping to hold the addresses of the facet contracts and a fallback function that delegates the function call to the appropriate facet. 
```

Author: Done [aa851b5](https://github.com/VenusProtocol/venus-protocol-documentation/pull/69/commits/aa851b5af5063542068ad5e6bf0ab9fb41087b00)

> Chained delegate calls are used, meaning calldata is delegated from Unitroller to the Diamond contract, and then a chained delegate call is made to a specific facet based on the function selector. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Chained delegate calls are used. This means calldata is delegated from Unitroller to the Diamond contract and then a chained delegate call is made to a specific facet based on the function selector. 
```

Author: Done [aa851b5](https://github.com/VenusProtocol/venus-protocol-documentation/pull/69/commits/aa851b5af5063542068ad5e6bf0ab9fb41087b00)

<figure><img src="../../.gitbook/assets/diamond-facets.png" alt="Diamond facets"><figcaption></figcaption></figure>

> The Diamond contract checks for the facet address in the **selectors-to-facet-address** mapping (`_selectorToFacetAndPosition` internal variable) and then makes a delegate call to that facet address. Facets inherit the ComptrollerStorage (ComptrollerV13Storage) to access the states.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The Diamond contract checks for the facet address in the **selectors-to-facet-address** mapping (`_selectorToFacetAndPosition` internal variable) and then makes a delegate call to that facet address. Facets inherit the ComptrollerStorage (ComptrollerV13Storage) to access the state.
```

Author: Done [aa851b5](https://github.com/VenusProtocol/venus-protocol-documentation/pull/69/commits/aa851b5af5063542068ad5e6bf0ab9fb41087b00)

> **Step 2:** Division of the comptroller into multiple facets based on the separation of concerns.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Step 2:** Division of the comptroller into multiple facets based on separation of concerns.
```

Author: Done [aa851b5](https://github.com/VenusProtocol/venus-protocol-documentation/pull/69/commits/aa851b5af5063542068ad5e6bf0ab9fb41087b00)

> Following the same eternal storage pattern i.e. inheriting storage contract for storage slots. This basically replaced the AppStorage of Diamond pattern.

Reviewer: Generally [AppStorage](https://eips.ethereum.org/EIPS/eip-2535#storage) is used with the diamond pattern. Since the Core Pool contracts still use Solidity 0.5.16 this wasn't an option and storage is handled using the same pattern as the original comptroller, by inheriting storage contracts.

Author: Done [aa851b5](https://github.com/VenusProtocol/venus-protocol-documentation/pull/69/commits/aa851b5af5063542068ad5e6bf0ab9fb41087b00)

> Comptroller storage contains the facet addresses, mapping of the function selectors to the facet address and mapping of all selectors to the facet address.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Comptroller storage contains the facet addresses, mapping of the function selectors to the facet address, and mapping of all selectors to the facet address.
```

Author: Done [aa851b5](https://github.com/VenusProtocol/venus-protocol-documentation/pull/69/commits/aa851b5af5063542068ad5e6bf0ab9fb41087b00)

## User interaction with new diamond pattern

> The user interaction remains consistent, wherein users will continue to interact with the Unitroller proxy contract. However, a significant modification has occurred in the way the implementation contract is invoked. Now, the Diamond proxy serves as the implementation contract for the Unitroller, and the Comptroller's implementation has been subdivided into multiple facets. These facets will function as the various components of the Diamond proxy.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Users will continue to interact with the Unitroller proxy contract same as before with one significant difference.  Now the Diamond proxy serves as the implementation contract for the Unitroller, and the Comptroller's implementation has been divided into multiple facets. These facets will function as the various components of the Diamond proxy.
```

Author: Done [aa851b5](https://github.com/VenusProtocol/venus-protocol-documentation/pull/69/commits/aa851b5af5063542068ad5e6bf0ab9fb41087b00)

Following a user's interaction with the Unitroller, the `delegateCall` operation will be directed towards the Diamond proxy. Once the `delegateCall` reaches the Diamond proxy, it will analyze the function selector and determine the appropriate facet address to which the `delegateCall` will be forwarded.

## How will new Upgrades work?

> **Scenario:** If a new state variable is to be introduced for an upgrade, which is being used by all or few facets.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Scenario:** A new state variable is to be introduced for an upgrade, which is being used by all or few facets.
```

Author: Done [aa851b5](https://github.com/VenusProtocol/venus-protocol-documentation/pull/69/commits/aa851b5af5063542068ad5e6bf0ab9fb41087b00)

> Example: Add a new state variable in the `comptrollerStorage` by extending the storage to `ComptrollerV14Storage` just like the new states are added for the facets by extending the previous storage.

Author: Done [aa851b5](https://github.com/VenusProtocol/venus-protocol-documentation/pull/69/commits/aa851b5af5063542068ad5e6bf0ab9fb41087b00)

**Scenario:** Add a new facet to the Diamond or update the existing facet by add/replace/remove function selectors.

Deploy the facet with the functions/methods that need to be added to the Comptroller Implementation.

Execute the `diamondCut` method(admin access) to add the new facet to the `comptrollerStorage`.

> To execute the `diamondCut` through VIP to add a new facet or add/replace/remove functions in the existing facet, there will be a need to pass the cut as an argument which can be generated by the facet-cut-params-generator script through the `generateCutParams` method by making changes to the constants used in the script according the actions need to perform on provided function selectors.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To execute the `diamondCut` through VIP, the cut argument can be generated using the facet-[cut-params-generator script](https://github.com/VenusProtocol/venus-protocol/blob/develop/script/deploy/comptroller/facet-cut-params-generator.ts) by customizing the `generateCutParams` to provide the correct actions on the provided function seletors.
```

Author: Done [aa851b5](https://github.com/VenusProtocol/venus-protocol-documentation/pull/69/commits/aa851b5af5063542068ad5e6bf0ab9fb41087b00)

## Diamond proxy implementation for Comptroller in the Core pool

> The Comptroller of the core pool is divided into 4 facets and 2 parent contracts extended by the facets. Facets will receive the function call through a chained delegateCall from Unitroller, and each facet holds its own responsibility as explained below:

Author: Done [aa851b5](https://github.com/VenusProtocol/venus-protocol-documentation/pull/69/commits/aa851b5af5063542068ad5e6bf0ab9fb41087b00)

### Facets

> **PolicyFacet:** This facet contains all the external pre-hook functions related to vToken.

Reviewer: Include links to natspec for facets and parent contracts

Author: Should i add github links for their netspec files?

Reviewer: I would link to them in gitbook. The links can be relative to their directory in this repo

Author: Done [aa851b5](https://github.com/VenusProtocol/venus-protocol-documentation/pull/69/commits/aa851b5af5063542068ad5e6bf0ab9fb41087b00)

> **SetterFacet:** This facet contains all the configurational setter functions.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**SetterFacet:** This facet contains all setter configuration functions.
```

Author: Done [aa851b5](https://github.com/VenusProtocol/venus-protocol-documentation/pull/69/commits/aa851b5af5063542068ad5e6bf0ab9fb41087b00)

> **MarketFacet:** This facet provides information about the asset in the market that you are in at that time. This facet is also responsible for entering and exiting the market.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**MarketFacet:** This facet provides market information including account activity in the market. This facet is also responsible for entering and exiting the market.
```

Author: Done [aa851b5](https://github.com/VenusProtocol/venus-protocol-documentation/pull/69/commits/aa851b5af5063542068ad5e6bf0ab9fb41087b00)
